In Pygame, managing opacity, also known as alpha transparency, can be achieved in several ways, primarily through the use of pygame.Surface objects with alpha channels.
1. Surface Alpha Transparency:
Create a pygame.Surface with an alpha channel by passing the pygame.SRCALPHA flag during its creation:
Python

    transparent_surface = pygame.Surface((width, height), pygame.SRCALPHA)
Set the overall transparency of this surface using set_alpha():
Python

    transparent_surface.set_alpha(alpha_value) # alpha_value ranges from 0 (transparent) to 255 (opaque)
Draw your desired content (images, shapes, text) onto this transparent_surface.
Blit the transparent_surface onto your main screen or another surface. The entire transparent_surface will then be blitted with the specified alpha value.
2. Per-Pixel Alpha Transparency:
When loading images with transparency (e.g., PNGs with alpha channels), use convert_alpha() after loading to ensure proper alpha handling:
Python

    image = pygame.image.load("image.png").convert_alpha()
When drawing shapes or text, you can specify an RGBA color tuple where the fourth value represents the alpha channel (0-255):
Python

    pygame.draw.circle(screen, (255, 0, 0, 128), (x, y), radius) # Red circle with 50% opacity
For more fine-grained control, you can manipulate individual pixel alpha values using get_at() and set_at() on a surface. This is more computationally intensive and generally used for advanced effects.
Important Considerations:
The main pygame.display.set_mode() surface (your screen) is typically opaque and does not directly support per-pixel alpha transparency for the entire window in a straightforward manner within Pygame's drawing functions.
Combining surface alpha transparency with per-pixel alpha transparency on the same surface is generally not recommended or directly supported in a way that yields predictable results, as set_alpha() applies a global alpha to the entire surface.
For complex transparency effects or fading, creating a separate pygame.Surface with SRCALPHA and then manipulating its alpha value is the most common and effective approach.